In this video, we'll learn about pointer to a structure. Pointer, that we have already studied.
Now, let us see how to have a pointer upon a structure.
So, already we have seen this example of rectangle structure having members length and breadth.
Now,
Inside the main ( ) function, I have a rectangle variable r and it is initialized with length 10 and breadth 5.
So this variable occupies memory and it will have the values 10 and 5. Now, if I want I can directly
access these members length and breadth by using variable name r.
So if I want to print or I want to change, so I can say r . length = 15; I can change it like this
I can change it like this.
But let us learn now, how to access it with a pointer.
So first of all, I will declare a pointer. struct rectangle pointer
So I'll give the point in the as p. Now, first thing,
How much memory rectangle consumes?
As you know, this takes 2 bytes,
We are assuming integer is taking 2 bytes. So, this is total 4 bytes.
Then how much memory p takes?
It takes just two bytes,
Every pointer, whatever the type it maybe, Pointer takes 2 bytes. Actually, it takes equal to the size of the
integer in any compiler.
If an integer takes 2 bytes in the compiler, pointer also takes 2 bytes.
If an integer takes 4 bytes, it will also take 4 bytes.
So whatever the size of integer it maybe, it is also same.
So let us assume 2 bytes. So, pointer doesn't take all 4 bytes, it will not have length and breadth,
Let me show you a pointer diagrammatically. So, just like a simple variable.
Now, I want to assign the address of this r. So, this pointer could be pointing on this variable.
This is initialized; declared and initialized.
Now I want to access these members using that pointer. So how I can do that?
I want to modify length to 20 suppose. So,
Can I say, p . length = 20?
No.
p is a pointer, it's not a variable, it's not having members. Then,
Do what? I have to come here, then I can access these members, so go to the place where the pointer is pointing,
suppose, the starting address is 200, then it is having address 200.
So go to address 200, and then access data.
So okay, I should write * , okay I wrote *, but this is wrong because the higher precedence is
for dot operator so first it will take it as p . length, so again it is wrong.
So I should enclose this inside the bracket.
So this should be inside the bracket, and then '.' Oh, so much I have to write down for accessing that
member.
So, instead of following this syntax, C language gives a simple syntax for accessing the members using pointer
So, I can simply say, p -> length = 20;
So either we can use this or we can use this.
So finally, for a normal variable, use dot operator,
This Dot operator and for pointer variable, use p ->
right? Instead of dot
We have ->
So this is the method of accessing a structure using pointer.
Arrow is used.
Now next, one more thing I will do.
I will create an object dynamically in heap using pointer. So I will create an object or a variable
of type rectangle, dynamically. So, I'll remove this and I will write down the code.
Now, let us see how to create it dynamically.
So for that, first of all I need a pointer. So, I will take a pointer of type structure, struct rectangle
and a pointer.
So I'm using p for pointer.
So this p is a pointer.
So, this will be created inside the stack. Now, already you are familiar, when you declare the variables,
that are created inside the stack, as a part of code activation record of the function.
So yes it's a variable,
So it's inside the stack.
Now we want a variable of type structure, object of type structure in heap.
So how to get the memory and heap? malloc ( ) function.
Yes.
So I should call malloc ( ) function
Yes malloc ( ) function. Then, I must give the number of bytes that are required. So, actually it is same as
this structure size. So, I can mention 4, or else I can say sizeof ( struct rectangle )
So rectangle structure is taken, right.Then, this allocates the memory.
Now we have to type-cast it, because the malloc ( ) function returns void pointer, right. So,void pointer means
it's a generic pointer so I have to typecast it.
So for typecasting, I should write down here, stuct rectangle *
So I'm typecasting it as a rectangle type structure pointer, then assign it to p.
This is how we can allocate object of type
rectangle in heap. So, this will be created in heap and it will be having length and breadth, and the pointer
will be pointing on that one.
This is the method.
Then, I want to access the member so I can use -> operator, So,
p -> length = 10 ; and
p -> breadth = 5 ;
So this is how I can assign length and breadth.
So this will be 10,
And this will be 5. That's all.
So, more if you want, you can write down.
I have to show you how to create a variable of type structure in heap by using malloc ( ) function.
So that's all about a pointer to a structure.
So, in the previous example I have shown you, an existing variable to the pointer was pointing there,
But now, this is a dynamic object created in heap and the pointer is pointing there. So that was static object
and this is dynamic object.
That's all about Pointer to Structure.